feat: Add blog post on block node discoverability (#348)
hiero-ledger/hiero-website: content/posts/hip-1137.md

+++
title = "HIP-1137: Block Node Discoverability via On-Chain Registry"
featured_image = "/images/Block_Node _Discoverability.png"
date = 2026-04-07T12:00:00-07:00
categories = ["Blog"]
tags = ["HIP", "Block Nodes", "Discoverability", "Registered Nodes", "Protocol"]
duration = "6 min read"
abstract = "HIP-1137 introduces a standardized on-chain registry mechanism enabling node operators to publish and network participants to discover block nodes, mirror nodes, RPC relays, and other infrastructure services."
[[authors]]
name = "Mounil Kankhara"
organization = "Hiero"
+++

With the addition of Block Nodes to the Hiero ledger, network participants require a reliable mechanism to discover and connect to functioning block nodes and other network infrastructure services. HIP-1137, recently approved by the Technical Steering Committee, addresses this critical need by introducing a standardized on-chain registry for discoverable nodes.

This post explains HIP-1137's architecture, its technical implementation, and the impact it brings to the Hiero ecosystem.

---

## Introduction and Background

> As the Hiero network continues to grow, so does the diversity of infrastructure supporting it. Beyond consensus nodes that maintain the core protocol, the ecosystem includes:

Reviewer: Small correction:

```suggestion
As the Hiero network continues to grow, so does the diversity of infrastructure supporting it. Beyond consensus nodes that maintain the network state, conduct the Hashgraph consensus algorithm, and execute transactions, the ecosystem includes:
```

> - **Block nodes** – nodes that produce and serve block data

Reviewer 2: Block nodes don't produce blocks. Only consensus node does.
At most BNs piece block items together to "build" a block to be verified and persisted.

```suggestion
- **Block nodes** – nodes that verify and persist block data
```

> - **RPC relays** – nodes providing remote procedure call endpoints

Reviewer 2: Relays provide an abstraction layer for the network s that EVM clients can interact with it using native APIs
```suggestion
- **RPC relays** – nodes providing EVM based interfaces on top of the Hiero network
```

> - **Mirror nodes** – nodes that replicate network state

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Mirror nodes** – nodes that ingest and index consensus network data output
```

- Other infrastructure nodes supporting various network functions

> Previously, there was no standardized, on-chain mechanism for node operators to advertise their infrastructure or for network participants to discover available services. This created friction for developers looking to connect to the network and for operators seeking to make their services known.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously, there was no standardized, on-chain mechanism for node operators, other than consensus node operators, to advertise their infrastructure or for network participants to discover available services. This created friction for developers looking to connect to the network and for operators seeking to make their services known.
```

HIP-1137 addresses this gap by introducing an on-chain registry for discoverable nodes.

---

## What is HIP-1137?

HIP-1137 establishes a standardized on-chain registry mechanism for discovering network infrastructure. The proposal introduces:

**Registered Nodes as Network Infrastructure**: Node operators can create, update, and delete registered node records directly on the Hiero network via new transactions in the Node Service.

**Service Endpoints**: Each registered node publishes one or more service endpoints with TCP/UDP ports, IP addresses (IPv4/IPv6), or fully-qualified domain names, along with optional TLS requirements.

> **Multiple Node Types**: The registry supports block nodes (with specific APIs like STATUS, PUBLISH, SUBSCRIBE_STREAM, STATE_PROOF), mirror nodes, RPC relays, and general service endpoints in a pluggable architecture.

Reviewer 2: This section mixes logic.
I think you want to present that it supports multiple APIs per node type. For example BN ....
The point being node types can list their exposed APIs

Reviewer: The following might be a helpful rewording:

```suggestion
**Multiple Endpoints for each Node**: The registry supports endpoints for block nodes, mirror nodes, RPC relays, and general services in a pluggable architecture.
  Each endpoint may provide additional information specific to the endpoint service, such as provided APIs.
```

> **Consensus Node Association**: Consensus node operators can associate registered nodes they operate via the `associated_registered_nodes` list, enabling mutual discovery between different node types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Consensus Node Association**: Consensus node operators can associate registered nodes they operate via the `associated_registered_nodes` list, enabling clients to find additional infrastructure associated with existing consensus nodes.
```

**3. Extensible Architecture**
The registry supports multiple service types (block nodes, mirror nodes, RPC relays, general services) with type-specific metadata. New node types can be added in the future without breaking existing functionality.

**4. Multiple Endpoints**
A single registered node can expose up to 50 different service endpoints, supporting multiple APIs or redundancy across different host addresses or FQDNs.

**5. Scalable and Decentralized**
With the registry embedded in network state, there's no reliance on centralized directories or out-of-band coordination. The system scales naturally as more operators register their infrastructure.

---

## Technical Implementation

HIP-1137 introduces three new transaction types for managing registered nodes on the network:

**New Transaction Types:**

1. **CreateRegisteredNode** – Operators create a new registered node entry with:
   - Admin key (controls subsequent updates/deletions)

>    - Description of the node (up to 100 bytes)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Description of the node (up to 100 bytes, when encoded UTF-8)
```
